Resources/doc/backend/extensions.md, before:

Extensions
==========

Overview
--------

Datagrid object only take care about converting datasource to result set. All other operations are performed by extensions(e.g. pagination, filtering, etc..).
Here's list of already implemented extensions:

- [Formatter](extensions/formatter.md) - responsible for backend field formatting(e.g generating url using router, translate using symfony translator, etc..).
                                         Also this extension take care about passing columns configuration to view layer.
- [Pager](extensions/pager.md) - responsible for pagination
- [Sorter](extensions/sorter.md) - responsible for sorting
- [Action](extensions/action.md) - provides actions configurations for grid
- [Mass Action](extensions/mass_action.md) - provides mass actions configurations for grid
- [Toolbar](extensions/toolbar.md) - provides toolbar configuration for view
- [Grid Views](extensions/grid_views.md) - provides configuration for grid views toolbar
- [Export](extensions/export.md) - responsible for export grid data
- [Field ACL](extensions/field_acl.md) - allow to protect entity fields with ACL

Customization
-------------

To implement your extension you have to do following:

 - Develop class that implements ExtensionVisitorInterface (also there is basic implementation in AbstractExtension class)
 - Register you extension as service with tag { name: oro_datagrid.extension }

Commit message:

CRM-5574: Kanban board for opportunities
- Implemented new option to datagrid bundle - appearance
- Created new datagrid extension to manage appearance
- added support of appearance options into datagrid-component, appearance-builder
- added plugin manager into datagrid-component
- added board related files: board-appearance-plugin, number of views, data collection wrapper

Resources/doc/backend/extensions.md, after:

Extensions
==========

Overview
--------

Datagrid object only take care about converting datasource to result set. All other operations are performed by extensions(e.g. pagination, filtering, etc..).
Here's list of already implemented extensions:

- [Formatter](extensions/formatter.md) - responsible for backend field formatting(e.g generating url using router, translate using symfony translator, etc..).
                                         Also this extension take care about passing columns configuration to view layer.
- [Pager](extensions/pager.md) - responsible for pagination
- [Sorter](extensions/sorter.md) - responsible for sorting
- [Action](extensions/action.md) - provides actions configurations for grid
- [Mass Action](extensions/mass_action.md) - provides mass actions configurations for grid
- [Toolbar](extensions/toolbar.md) - provides toolbar configuration for view
- [Grid Views](extensions/grid_views.md) - provides configuration for grid views toolbar
- [Export](extensions/export.md) - responsible for export grid data
- [Field ACL](extensions/field_acl.md) - allow to protect entity fields with ACL
- [Board](extensions/board.md) - responsible for adding Kanban board views for datagrids

Customization
-------------

To implement your extension you have to do following:

 - Develop class that implements ExtensionVisitorInterface (also there is basic implementation in AbstractExtension class)
 - Register you extension as service with tag { name: oro_datagrid.extension }
